Add Quarkus Data Hibernate getting started tutorial (#55658)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/quarkus-data-hibernate-getting-started.adoc

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Getting Started with Quarkus Data Hibernate
include::_attributes.adoc[]
:categories: data
:summary: A step-by-step guide to database access in Quarkus
:topics: data,hibernate-orm,hibernate-reactive,panache,getting-started
:extensions: io.quarkus:quarkus-data-hibernate
:extension-status: experimental

include::{includes}/extension-status.adoc[]

== Overview

> Database access is something almost every application needs, whether it's persisting data or querying tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Database access is something many applications need, whether it's persisting data or querying tables.
```

In this guide we explain how Quarkus Data provides database access with entity mapping, compile-time validated repositories, and reactive database access.

== Prerequisites

:prerequisites-docker:

> include::{includes}/prerequisites.adoc[]

Reviewer: The prerequisites mention:

> To complete this guide, you need:
> [...]
> Apache Maven 3.9.16
> [...]
> Optionally Mandrel or GraalVM installed and [configured appropriately](file:///home/yrodiere/workspaces/main/quarkus/docs/target/generated-docs/building-native-image.html#configuring-graalvm) if you want to build a native executable (or Docker if you use a native container build) :!prerequisites-docker:

Which is not true since:

1. We provide instructions for Gradle, too
2. We don't mention native at all in this tutorial.

I guess we can set an attribute to disable the GraalVM part? Or add a link to the native building guide at the end in some "Going further" section.

Note I suspect the Maven/Gradle part is harder to fix (since you technically can't create a new app using just Gradle, and I'm not sure the Gradle requirements are clear either), so feel free to ignore that part.

> :!prerequisites-docker:

Reviewer: This seems incorrect, when I build the docs it gets rendered directly in the text:

<img width="1096" height="95" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ac2f4d59-0e62-4516-b861-74365334571a" />

== Introduction

You're working on a physical bookstore website, in which you want users to be able to browse books with titles.
In this tutorial, we won't deal with the frontend and the user interface, we just want to connect to the database.

We'll start this tutorial by creating a new empty Quarkus application:

:create-app-artifact-id: quarkus-data-tutorial
include::{includes}/devtools/create-app.adoc[]

> Let's start by importing the extensions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then let's import the extensions:
```

Since you already started by creating the app above.

BTW, I'm pretty sure you can do app creation + adding extensions in a single step. That's what we do in https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started#bootstrapping-the-project .

Author: I applied the suggestion but I want to keep the extensions separated from creation as it flows better with the explanation

:add-extension-extensions: quarkus-data-hibernate,quarkus-jdbc-postgresql
include::{includes}/devtools/extension-add.adoc[]

The first dependency, `quarkus-data-hibernate`, is the Quarkus extension that provides everything you need for database access.

> The second dependency, `quarkus-jdbc-postgresql`, is the JDBC driver that tells Quarkus how to talk to a PostgreSQL database. If you're using a different database (MySQL, MariaDB, H2, etc.), pick the corresponding `quarkus-jdbc-*` driver instead (see xref:datasource.adoc#configure-a-jdbc-datasource[Configure a JDBC datasource]). Quarkus Data Hibernate cannot work without a JDBC driver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second dependency, `quarkus-jdbc-postgresql`, is the JDBC driver that tells Quarkus how to talk to a PostgreSQL database. If you're using a different database (MySQL, MariaDB, H2, etc.), pick the corresponding `quarkus-jdbc-*` driver instead (see xref:datasource.adoc#configure-a-jdbc-datasource[Configure a JDBC datasource]). Quarkus Data Hibernate cannot work without a JDBC driver <<reactive,or a reactive SQL client>>.
```

That's all you need to start querying your database.

> Quarkus Data Hibernate uses the Hibernate annotation processor, a key component that reads your repository interfaces at compile time, validates queries, and generates implementation classes.

Reviewer: Then that was not all you need, was it? :)

I'd just remove that claim.

```suggestion
Quarkus Data Hibernate uses the Hibernate annotation processor, a key component that reads your repository interfaces at compile time, validates queries, and generates implementation classes.
```

These generated classes are compiled together with your code and wired up automatically by Quarkus. They are also simple to read, in case you want to understand how it works internally.

To enable it, add the annotation processor configuration to your build file:

include::{includes}/hibernate-processor-config.adoc[]

Now run Quarkus continuous testing in a separate tab of your terminal:

include::{includes}/devtools/test.adoc[]

You don't need to restart Quarkus testing, it will re-run tests continuously after every change.

TIP: Database connections are called "Data Sources" in Quarkus. Even if you don't configure a datasource, Quarkus will automatically start a database container for you via xref:dev-services.adoc[Dev Services]. This means you can run `quarkus dev` and start coding without installing or configuring a database. See the xref:datasource.adoc[Datasource guide] for more details.

== Entities and repositories

> We start by mapping our database table to a Java class and defining a repository for it. A Java class that maps to a database table is called an Entity.

Reviewer: There are classes mapping to tables and that are not entities, and an entity may map to multiple tables.

Let's try to be both simple and correct:

```suggestion
We start by mapping our database table to a Java class and defining a repository for it. An _entity_ is a Java class that maps to database tables.
```

Reviewer 2: Normally, I think we use _italics_ rather than "quotes" for terms, no?

Reviewer: Sure, done

    public String isbn;
    public BigDecimal price;

    public interface Repo extends RecordRepository<Book> { // <4>
        @Find
        List<Book> findByTitle(String title); // <5>

        @Query("where price < :maxPrice order by title")
        List<Book> cheaperThan(BigDecimal maxPrice); // <6>
    }
}
----
<1> Tells Hibernate that this class maps to a database table. Hibernate will use the class name as the table name and the field names as column names.
<2> `RecordEntity` gives the entity a generated `Long` id field and convenient methods that will be used later.
<3> These public fields map to columns in the `Book` table. Hibernate reads and writes these fields directly.
<4> Defines a repository: a place to put all your query methods for `Book`. By nesting it inside the entity, the queries and the data they operate on live together. You can name this interface whatever you want: `Queries`, `Repo`, `BookQueries`, etc.
<5> `@Find` tells Quarkus Data Hibernate to generate a query based on the method's parameter names. `findByTitle(String title)` becomes a query that matches the `title` field on `Book`. Parameters are inferred from the method signature.

> <6> `@Query` lets you write an HQL fragment when you need more control. It avoids the need to write what you select. The entity type is inferred from the return type `List<Book>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<6> `@Query` lets you write an HQL fragment when you need more control. The `select` and `from` parts are optional: they can be inferred from the return type `List<Book>`.
```

Reviewer: I wonder if you shouldn't introduce this separately though, since people that are not familiar with what an entity is, will certainly not be familiar with HQL. We'd need to explain that, maybe add a link to https://docs.hibernate.org/orm/8.0/querylanguage/html_single/ ?

If you make a typo in a parameter name, the build fails. Try changing the parameter name to:

[source,java]
----
        @Find
        List<Book> findByTitle(String tilte);
----

You should see a compilation error like:

[source]
----
error: no matching field named 'tilte' in entity class 'org.acme.Book'

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----

NOTE: The same sort of compile-time checks apply to the query string passed to `@Query`.
```

At least I *think* they do. But it might be an opt-in feature.

Reviewer 2: They do, it's not opt-in.

Get the parameter back to the correct name so that we can proceed further.

== Creating new entities

Let's write a service to create a new book:

[source,java]
----
@ApplicationScoped
public class LibraryService {

    @Transactional // <1>
    public void contributeNewBook(String title, String isbn, BigDecimal price) {
        Book book = new Book();
        book.title = title;
        book.isbn = isbn;
        book.price = price;
        book.insert(); // <2>
    }
}
----
<1> Wraps the method in a database transaction. This is required to define the scope of your operations, so that related operations are committed or rolled back together.

> <2> `insert()` immediately executes an `INSERT` statement against the database. It comes from `RecordEntity` that we extended on the entity earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> `insert()` immediately executes an `INSERT` statement against the database. It comes from `RecordEntity` that we extended on the entity earlier, together with other lifecycle methods such as `update()` or `delete()`.
```

... Maybe? Otherwise this is left implied until you start talking about managed sessions, where these methods are not relevant.

import io.quarkus.test.junit.QuarkusTest;
import jakarta.inject.Inject;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;

import static org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions.*;

@QuarkusTest
public class LibraryServiceTest {

    @Inject
    LibraryService libraryService;

    @Inject
    Book.Repo bookRepo;

    @Test
    @TestTransaction // <1>
    void shouldInsertAndQueryBooks() {
        libraryService.contributeNewBook("Effective Java", "978-0134685991", BigDecimal.valueOf(45.00));
        libraryService.contributeNewBook("Clean Code", "978-0132350884", BigDecimal.valueOf(40.00));

        assertEquals(1, bookRepo.findByTitle("Effective Java").size());
        assertEquals(1, bookRepo.cheaperThan(BigDecimal.valueOf(42)).size());
        assertTrue(bookRepo.findByTitle("Unknown Book").isEmpty());
    }
}
----
<1> `@TestTransaction` rolls back all database changes when the test method ends. Without it, the inserted book would stay in the database and accumulate on every re-run, causing assertions on counts or prices to fail. Use it on any test that writes data.

[NOTE]
====
If you're an experienced Hibernate user, you'll find this part very different from what you're used to.

> When you call `insert()`, `update()`, or `delete()`, an operation is instantly triggered against the database, without calling `.flush()` explicitly.

Reviewer: I'd argue experienced Hibernate users don't call flush, either, they expect the transaction layer to do it for them. Maybe:

```suggestion
When you call `insert()`, `update()`, or `delete()`, an operation is instantly triggered against the database, instead of being delayed until the next flush or commit.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you call `insert()`, `update()`, or `delete()`, an operation is instantly triggered against the database, instead of being delayed until Hibernate needs to send the operation to the database.
```

Perhaps? Because I agree, nobody calls `flush` or `commit` explicitely.

This is intentional: it's a simpler model that uses `StatelessSession` under the covers.
In this mode every change to an object requires an explicit save operation.
If you're not interested in this style and want the full power of managed entities, skip ahead to <<managed-session>>.
====

=== About entity identifiers

`RecordEntity` includes a generated `Long` id field automatically.

You can use Hibernate's `@Id` and `@GeneratedValue` directly if you prefer, or if you need a custom ID strategy.

> See the xref:quarkus-data-hibernate.adoc#about-entity-identifiers[reference guide] for the full list of options.

Reviewer: This still seems out of place... now that you've simplified it a great deal, it could just be a note/tip in "Entities and repositories", no? Especially since you already talk about the `Long` id there.

Reviewer 2: I take it this is leaving `RecordEntity.CustomId` out on purpose? I think that's a good idea, it's more advanced.

Author: Moved it as a tip

[[managed-session]]
== Managed session

In our bookstore we want to run a promotional sale: apply a discount to all books from a given publisher, but only if the publisher allows it.
Some publishers offer discounts while others don't.

Let's create a `Publisher` entity with a one-to-many relationship to `Book`.

[source,java]
----
package org.acme;

import io.quarkus.data.hibernate.RecordEntity;
import io.quarkus.data.hibernate.RecordRepository;
import jakarta.data.repository.Find;
import jakarta.persistence.Entity;
import jakarta.persistence.OneToMany;

import java.util.List;

@Entity
public class Publisher extends RecordEntity {
    public String name;
    public String country;
    public boolean allowsDiscounts;

>     @OneToMany(mappedBy = "publisher") // <1>

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we can use the metamodel attribute for this? Perhaps not due to how compilation happens, but worth trying.

Author: Used the metamodel's version in the example

    public List<Book> books;

    public interface Repo extends RecordRepository<Publisher> {
        @Find
        List<Publisher> findByCountry(String country);
    }
}
----
<1> A publisher has many books. `mappedBy` needs to point to the equivalent `@ManyToOne` association.

And add a `publisher` field to `Book`:

[source,java]
----
@Entity
public class Book extends RecordEntity {
    public String title;
    public String isbn;
    public BigDecimal price;
    @ManyToOne // <1>
    public Publisher publisher;

    public interface Repo extends RecordRepository<Book> {
        @Find
        List<Book> findByTitle(String title);

        @Find
        List<Book> findByPublisher(Publisher publisher);

        @Query("where price < :maxPrice order by title")
        List<Book> cheaperThan(BigDecimal maxPrice);
    }
}
----

> <1> Each book belongs to one publisher. This is the `publisher` string we used in `mappedBy` before.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> Each book belongs to one publisher. This is the `publisher` field name we used in `mappedBy` before.
```

Now let's implement our discount service:

[source,java]
----
@ApplicationScoped
public class SalesService {

    @Inject
    Publisher.Repo publisherRepo;

    @Inject
    Book.Repo bookRepo;

    @Transactional
    public void applyCountrySale(String country, BigDecimal discountPercent) {
        List<Publisher> publishers = publisherRepo.findByCountry(country);
        BigDecimal factor = BigDecimal.ONE.subtract(discountPercent.divide(BigDecimal.valueOf(100)));
        List<Book> modified = new ArrayList<>(); // <1>
        for (Publisher publisher : publishers) {

>             if (publisher.allowsDiscounts) {

Reviewer: It occurs to me that you would typically do this with `publisherRepo.findByCountryAndDiscounts(country, true)`...

But then I'm not even sure what the "allowsDiscount" bring to your example -- you could remove it and everything would be the same, no?

Author: It's a synthetic example that shows that only a few books will be updated. I think it shows the point that a code block will modify only some entities and another code block with modify the others. I think it's a good compromise for an example that would seem realistic but not necessarily something that you would push to production as it is. I'm open to new suggestions, anyway, but they need to have the same characteristics (that is, to show an example of keeping track of modified entities). That is necessary to show the advantages of the managed session.

Reviewer: I'll add a suggestion

Reviewer: Actually, I see you changed the code to have multiple conditions and multiple different changes... I think you have a better case for not including the condition in the SQL now.

>                 List<Book> books = bookRepo.findByPublisher(publisher); // <2>

Reviewer 2: This could do with a comment explaining that `publisher.books` will not work so we have to do this.

I wonder if the grouping of updates is the most pertinent way to tell people "if you need this, then use a managed session". Perhaps it is.

Perhaps the more common frustration people will have will be the lack of lazy loading, and so we could simplify this example to focus on this?

Otherwise, I've a third more tenuous perhaps example of why people would prefer stateless over managed (so it's backwards for here, perhaps not useful): given a REST endpoint that is supposed to modify an entity, if you update the entity, then run into a condition that should require to abort the update (further validation, say), you _must_ throw an exception or roll back manually. Whereas with a record entity, you can just skip the `update` call.

I'm just throwing it out there in case you find that it could turn into a useful example, but I can't see how to reverse it in favour of managed entities, so if you can't either, feel free to ignore it.

Reviewer: > Otherwise, I've a third more tenuous perhaps example of why people would prefer stateless over managed (so it's backwards for here, perhaps not useful): given a REST endpoint that is supposed to modify an entity, if you update the entity, then run into a condition that should require to abort the update (further validation, say), you _must_ throw an exception or roll back manually. Whereas with a record entity, you can just skip the `update` call.

Sir, have you heard of `session.clear()`? `session.refresh` perhaps?

In any case... I'm not sure that letting your entities go their merry way through your application while holding data that wasn't (will not be) pushed to the database is a great example.

Author: Added the example to this note

> <2> In a stateless session, to-many associations are not fetched automatically. Accessing `publisher.books` directly would throw an exception. We load the books explicitly via a repository query. In Hibernate, these are called "lazy associations".

                for (Book book : books) {

>                     book.price = book.price.multiply(factor).setScale(2, RoundingMode.HALF_UP);

Reviewer: Mentioning this since you feel like the tutorial should show a realistic use case: changing the price in-place means losing important data about the list price ("normal" price).

I'd expect something like this in a real app:

```suggestion
                    book.currentPrice = book.listPrice.multiply(factor).setScale(2, RoundingMode.HALF_UP);
```

                    modified.add(book); // <3>
                }
            }
        }

>         // Other business logic that modifies books i.e. applying loyalty points, rounding prices ...

Reviewer: This is very critical to your example, as otherwise the sale can likely be applied with a rather simple `update` query, making the usefulness of any persistence layer (stateless or stateful) debatable. You might want to make this "other business logic" more explicit?

It could just be a call to another method/service -- which I think would be what typically makes stateful contexts relevant, as tracking entity state in a given method is easy, but tracking it across multiple methods becomes a headache. This will be very apparent with multiple methods, as the callee needs to return the list of modified books somehow.

Author: Added a new business logic call

            book.update(); // <4>
        }
    }
}
----
<1> We collect the books we modify so we can update them all at the end.
<2> In a stateless session, to-many associations are not fetched automatically. We load the books explicitly via a repository query. In Hibernate, these are called "lazy associations".
<3> We add the book to our list of modified objects.
<4> We update once at the end, after all modifications are done.

Notice how the persistence concerns, tracking which objects changed, loading associations explicitly, calling `update()`, are mixed in with the business logic. This method is becoming complex.

Let's write a test to verify it works:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme;

import io.quarkus.test.junit.QuarkusTest;
import jakarta.inject.Inject;
import jakarta.transaction.Transactional;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.AfterEach;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.BeforeEach;
import org.junit.jupiter.api.Test;

import java.math.BigDecimal;

import static org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions.*;

@QuarkusTest
public class SalesServiceTest {

    @Inject
    SalesService salesService;

    @Inject
    Book.Repo bookRepo;

    @BeforeEach
    @Transactional

>     void setUp() {

Reviewer 2: I think that this long test is only in this "getting started" guide to support the "why you need managed entities" example, which is already complex and I feel may be a detour from what could be an explanation based on data points rather than a long complex code story.

I find it confusing that the "Managed entities" section starts with `… extends RecordEntity`, and I feel that this entire exercise of illustration turns this "getting started" guide into something unnecessarily long.

Perhaps all we need rather than this long example is a simple enumeration of why you may need managed entities?

- Managed entities will support lazy loading of relation attributes, avoiding the need to load them via a new repository method
- Managed entities will automatically send all modifications to their fields to the database, optimised in as few operations as possible, whenever Hibernate needs to send them (for example when the transaction is committed)
- Managed entities are more commonly known and documented than record entities

Followed by "here's how you would write `Publisher` as a managed entity…"

WDYT?

Author: I see your point, and I found it definitely valid. But I still like the example so I want to keep it: I put the example in a specific section and moved the "Managed Session" section where it's effectively discussed see https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/55658/commits/4f23f7ef02d39725901d80b1b3a4175287fa3687

        ddd.insert();

        Book refactoring = new Book();
        refactoring.title = "Refactoring";
        refactoring.isbn = "978-0134757599";
        refactoring.price = new BigDecimal("50.00");
        refactoring.publisher = prenticeHall;
        refactoring.insert();
    }

    @AfterEach
    @Transactional
    void tearDown() {
        bookRepo.deleteAll();
    }

    @Test
    @Transactional
    void shouldApplySaleOnlyToPublishersThatAllowDiscounts() {
        salesService.applyCountrySale("US", BigDecimal.valueOf(10));

        // Addison-Wesley (US, allows discounts): prices reduced by 10%
        assertEquals(new BigDecimal("40.50"), bookRepo.findByTitle("Effective Java").getFirst().price); // was: 45.00
        assertEquals(new BigDecimal("36.00"), bookRepo.findByTitle("Clean Code").getFirst().price); // was: 40.00

        // Prentice Hall (US, no discounts): prices unchanged
        assertEquals(new BigDecimal("55.00"), bookRepo.findByTitle("Domain-Driven Design").getFirst().price);
        assertEquals(new BigDecimal("50.00"), bookRepo.findByTitle("Refactoring").getFirst().price);
    }
}
----

This works, but it can be simpler.

> Quarkus Data Hibernate supports a "managed persistence context" that tracks objects for you: Hibernate monitors every entity it loads, detects which fields changed, and generates the minimal SQL needed to keep entities synchronized with the database at commit time. You don't need to track dirty objects, and lazy associations are fetched automatically when you access them.

Reviewer 2: Hah. This entire section could start right there (and remove what's between the title and this justification) :)

Author: See https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/55658#discussion_r3712919521

Switch `Book` and `Publisher` to use `ManagedEntity` and managed repositories:

[source,java]
----
@Entity
public class Publisher extends ManagedEntity { // <1>
    public String name;
    public String country;
    public boolean allowsDiscounts;
    @OneToMany(mappedBy = "publisher")
    public List<Book> books;

    public interface Repo extends ManagedRepository<Publisher> { // <2>
        @Find
        List<Publisher> findByCountry(String country);
    }
}
----

[source,java]
----
@Entity
public class Book extends ManagedEntity { // <1>
    public String title;
    public String isbn;
    public BigDecimal price;
    @ManyToOne
    public Publisher publisher;

    public interface Repo extends ManagedRepository<Book> { // <2>
        @Find
        List<Book> findByTitle(String title);

        @Query("where price < :maxPrice order by title")
        List<Book> cheaperThan(BigDecimal maxPrice);
    }
}
----

> <1> `ManagedEntity` replaces `RecordEntity`. This tells Hibernate to track this entity in its persistence context.

Reviewer 2: I get why you'd say that, but you know it's not true, right? It doesn't tell anything to Hibernate. The _only_ thing that tells Hibernate to manage an entity is the type of repository you load it from: managed ot record.

Well, and also after you call `.persist()` on the entity, that also makes it managed. But errr… even `recordEntity.blockingManaged().persist()` will make `recordEntity` managed 😬

Author: yes it's a simplification for the tutorial. Given that you understand the point, it kind of works :)

<2> The repository uses `ManagedRepository` instead of `RecordRepository`.

Since the entities are now managed, `insert()` is no longer available. You'll get some compilation errors. Use `persist()` instead:

[source,java]
----
@ApplicationScoped
public class LibraryService {

    @Transactional
    public void contributeNewBook(String title, String isbn, BigDecimal price) {
        Book book = new Book();
        book.title = title;
        book.isbn = isbn;
        book.price = price;
        book.persist(); // <1>
    }
}
----

> <1> `persist()` replaces `insert()`. Unlike `insert()`, it doesn't execute SQL immediately, Hibernate will flush the changes automatically. You don't need to worry about when SQL is sent to the database.

Reviewer 2: Generally I tend to prefer these explanations in the sentence that leads to the example, to explain and justify why `insert` is replaced by `persist`: otherwise the leading sentence makes me wonder "why???" and I don't get the reason until _after_ the entire code block.

Also, I wonder if it's worth mentioning that any changes to the entity _after_ `.persist()` will still be sent to the DB, unlike `.insert()`?

Author: Moved the explanation before, added a note

Now the service becomes pure business logic:

[source,java]
----
@ApplicationScoped
public class SalesService {

    @Inject
    Publisher.Repo publisherRepo;

    @Transactional

>     public void applyCountrySale(String country, BigDecimal discountPercent) {

Reviewer 2: OK this is a nice ending to the example I'm advocating for removing. That's good advertisement, but even then, I don't think it justifies the leading long and complex introduction of the "bad" version of this 🤔

Reviewer 2: Perhaps you can just show this example, and say "try to implement this without lazy loading and dirty tracking, I dare you".

I think Hibernate docs have something like this IIRC where (probably?) Gavin says "try to implement this in SQL" to argue that HQL makes things much simpler.

Author: I split the long part in a separate section, now it looks smaller, even if it's not :)

        BigDecimal factor = BigDecimal.ONE.subtract(discountPercent.divide(BigDecimal.valueOf(100)));
        List<Publisher> publishers = publisherRepo.findByCountry(country);
        for (Publisher publisher : publishers) {
            if (publisher.allowsDiscounts) {
                for (Book book : publisher.books) { // <1>
                    book.price = book.price.multiply(factor).setScale(2, RoundingMode.HALF_UP); // <2>
                }
            }
        }
    } // <3>
}
----
<1> Accessing `publisher.books` triggers a lazy fetch: Hibernate loads the books from the database automatically.
<2> We just set the field. No need to call `update()`.
<3> When the `@Transactional` method returns, Hibernate automatically generates the SQL needed to keep the database in sync with the objects in memory. Only the books that were actually modified get an `UPDATE` statement.

The test is exactly the same: the behavior hasn't changed, the implementation only got simpler.

> It's up to you to decide whether to use a Managed Entity or a Stateless one. The Managed Repository is more expressive, but reasoning about it is more complex and might require knowing some details about how Hibernate handles objects. If you're an experienced Hibernate developer, you expect that changing an object's field doesn't immediately hit the database. Some users prefer a more explicit way to control the database. Either way is fine, and Quarkus Data Hibernate makes it easy to use both and to switch without committing to one style or the other.

Reviewer: Technically, what we just demonstrated does *not* make it easy to switch -- once you've written most of you application, you've committed since all your code uses stateful or stateless, which is hardcoded in the base type of your entities.
I know we do have ways around that, but since we didn't show it... it's probably better left as a tip?

Also, Stateless => Record?

```suggestion
It's up to you to decide whether to use a Managed Entity or a Record one. The Managed Repository is more expressive, but reasoning about it is more complex and might require knowing some details about how Hibernate handles objects. If you're an experienced Hibernate developer, you expect that changing an object's field doesn't immediately hit the database. Some users prefer a more explicit way to control the database. Either way is fine, and Quarkus Data Hibernate makes it easy to use either.

TIP: You can switch from one way to the other for ad hoc use cases, e.g. have one business method that manipulates a `ManagedEntity` as if it was a `RecordEntity`. See <<SOME LINK TO DOCS HERE>> for more details.
```

Author: Applied, but removed the TIP as we need to write that part of documentation before

== Reactive

If you're already using reactive APIs in your application (Quarkus Messaging, reactive REST clients, Vert.x), you want your database access to compose naturally with them without blocking the event loop.

> Quarkus Data Hibernate lets you experiment with both blocking and reactive to see what works best for your case. The same entity model works unchanged with a reactive driver.

Reviewer: While experimentation is one argument, stating it that way also gives the feeling it's only for playing. Maybe let's keep "experimental" warnings whey they are, and focus more on flexibility here?

```suggestion
Quarkus Data Hibernate lets you pick blocking or reactive to match your use case. The same entity model works unchanged with a reactive driver.
```

First, add the reactive dependencies:

:add-extension-extensions: quarkus-hibernate-reactive,quarkus-hibernate-reactive-panache,quarkus-reactive-pg-client
include::{includes}/devtools/extension-add.adoc[]

> NOTE: `quarkus-hibernate-reactive-panache` is needed because `quarkus-hibernate-reactive` does not yet transitively include the classes required by the annotation processor to generate reactive repository implementations (see https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/54892[#54892]).

Reviewer: If you're talking about the first problem mentioned in #54892, I think you can link directly to #53871? Not sure.

```suggestion
NOTE: `quarkus-hibernate-reactive-panache` is needed because `quarkus-hibernate-reactive` does not yet transitively include the classes required by the annotation processor to generate reactive repository implementations (see https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/53871[#53871]).
```

> NOTE: `quarkus-hibernate-reactive-panache` is needed because `quarkus-hibernate-reactive` does not yet transitively include the classes required by the annotation processor to generate reactive repository implementations (see https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/54892[#54892]).

Reviewer 2: I think it's `quarkus-hibernate-reactive-panache-common` that you need. The one you mention will come with HR/Panache which is _not_ what we want.

Author: good catch thanks

`quarkus-hibernate-reactive` adds the reactive Hibernate engine, which uses non-blocking I/O under the covers instead of JDBC.

> `quarkus-reactive-pg-client` is the reactive equivalent of `quarkus-jdbc-postgresql`. It provides a non-blocking PostgreSQL driver built on Vert.x. As its blocking counterpart, it's mandatory for Quarkus Data Hibernate to work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`quarkus-reactive-pg-client` is the reactive equivalent to `quarkus-jdbc-postgresql`. It provides a non-blocking PostgreSQL driver built on Vert.x. As its blocking counterpart, it's mandatory for Quarkus Data Hibernate to work.
```

        book.isbn = "978-0134685991";
        book.price = BigDecimal.valueOf(45.00);

        asserter.execute(() -> reactiveBookRepo.persist(book)); // <3>
        asserter.assertThat( // <4>
            () -> reactiveBookRepo.findByTitle("Effective Java"),
            books -> {
                assertEquals(1, books.size());
                assertEquals("Effective Java", books.getFirst().title);
            }
        );
    }
}
----
<1> `@RunOnVertxContext` ensures the test runs on the Vert.x event loop, which is required for reactive database access.
<2> `@TestReactiveTransaction` opens a reactive session and transaction for the test, and rolls back at the end.
<3> `UniAsserter.execute()` is a convenient method to execute and wait for the reactive method to complete.
<4> `UniAsserter.assertThat()` lets you test reactive code by providing an assertion as the second parameter.

For the full details on reactive sessions, stateless reactive, and combining blocking and reactive code, see the xref:quarkus-data-hibernate.adoc#lets-get-reactive[reference guide].

== What you have built

In this guide you went from an empty project to a working database application:

> - You introduced entities and repositories with compile-time validation via the Hibernate annotation processor.

Reviewer 2: Unclear if we should call it the "hibernate annotation processor" or the "quarkus data annotation processor". I know it's 99.99% the "hibernate" one, but it may prove confusing that the import is called different?

Author: Let's use "Quarkus Data annotation processor" everywhere :)

        assertEquals(new BigDecimal("50.00"), bookRepo.findByTitle("Refactoring").getFirst().currentPrice);
    }
}
----

[[managed-session]]
== Managed session

The previous example of a Discount Service works, but it can be simpler.
Quarkus Data Hibernate supports a "managed persistence context" that tracks objects for you: Hibernate monitors every entity it loads, detects which fields changed, and generates the minimal SQL needed to keep entities synchronized with the database at commit time. You don't need to track dirty objects, and lazy associations are fetched automatically when you access them.

Switch `Book` and `Publisher` to use `ManagedEntity` and managed repositories:

[source,java]
----
@Entity
public class Publisher extends ManagedEntity { // <1>
    public String name;
    public String country;
    public boolean allowsDiscounts;
    public boolean allowsTranslation;
    @OneToMany(mappedBy = Book_.PUBLISHER)
    public List<Book> books;

    public interface Repo extends ManagedRepository<Publisher> { // <2>
        @Find
        List<Publisher> findByCountry(String country);
    }
}
----

> 

Reviewer 2: I wonder if the missing admonitions will be taken from the next code block. I guess I'd have to check the rendered output.
